title: "Exercise: Srchr"
exercise: srchr
---

## Phase 1
- When a user enters a search term, send a GET request to `/data/search.json`
  that includes a `q` parameter whose value is the search term. The response to
  this request is generated by the server, based on your query, so note that
  you won't find a `search.json` file in `/data`.
- When you receive the results, use the template at
  `/templates/people-detailed.tmpl` to display them.
- If there are no results, you should show a message indicating there are no
  results.

Note: If you're having a hard time coming up with a search term that returns
results, you can [see some example data here](http://localhost:8000/data/search/sample.json).

## Phase 2
- When a user clicks on the "Remove" button next to a search result, that
  search result should be removed from the list.
- When a user clicks on the "Like" button next to a search result, the name
  from that search result should be added to the list of favorite names on the
  right-hand side of the page; the "You haven't liked anything yet" message
  should be removed.
- Ensure that subsequent searches work as expected. The "Remove" and "Like"
  buttons should continue to work; the favorite names list should be
  maintained; and old results should be removed from the list.

## Phase 3
- Avoid making a request for a search that is empty or for a search that only
  contains spaces.
- Prevent the user from submitting a new search while an existing search
  request is in progress.

There is a mockup at `/exercises/search-app/mockup.png` for reference.
